# Genomic Analysis Project

This project consists of **two main components** for genomic data processing and simulation: **ExonSkipping** and **ReadSimulator**. Below is an overview of each module, its goal, and instructions on how to run it.

---

## 1. ExonSkipping

**Goal:**  
The main objective of this program is to identify **exon-skipping splicing events (ES-SE)** by processing **Gene Transfer Format (GTF)** files.

**Arguments:**

-gtf src/ExonSkipping/data/Homo_sapiens.GRCh37.67.gtf  
-o src/ExonSkipping/data/output.txt

<b>Plots:</b>
The plots class can be run to compare two GTF files. The results generated by ReportPlots is saved in the "plots" folder.

## 2. ReadSimulator

**Goal:**  
This program generates paired-end reads using real genomic data. It simulates NGS-like data by taking parameters such as read length, fragment length, and mutation rates. All results in this project are based on Homo sapiens GRCh37.

**Arguments:**  
  
-length 75  
-frlength 20  
-SD 80  
-mutationrate 1.0  
-readcounts src/ReadSimulator/data/readcounts.simulation  
-gtf src/ReadSimulator/data/Homo_sapiens.GRCh37.75.gtf  
-fasta src/ReadSimulator/data/Homo_sapiens.GRCh37.75.dna.toplevel.fa  
-fidx src/ReadSimulator/data/Homo_sapiens.GRCh37.75.dna.toplevel.fa.fai  
-od src/ReadSimulator/output

**Plots:**
The plots script can also be run with the same parameters, but note that large input files can make this step slow. Generated plots will appear in the "plots" folder. For the ones there, the frlength was set to 200, which explains the observed results.

---

### Note on Large Files

Some input and output files are **not included in this repository** due to their large sizes (ranging from 40 MB to 800 MB).  
These files include:

- Reference genome FASTA files
- Fasta index files (.fai)
- Large GTF files
- Simulation output files 